This is an episode that's been almost one year in the making,
the theolocution of Donald Hoffman and Joscha Bach,
both of whom should be extremely familiar to you if you've surveyed this channel before,
as we've done an unduly technical dive into Donald Hoffman's research papers,
and we've spoken to Joscha Bach several times before as well.
If you're unfamiliar, Donald Hoffman is a professor at the University of Irvine, California,
studying consciousness and evolutionary psychology using mathematical models,
and Joscha Bach is a cognitive scientist recognized in the field of AI as being exceptionally ingenious.
Both have unexampled views of consciousness and free will,
which harmonize and contradict in prepossessing and informative ways.
Click on the timestamp in the description if you'd like to skip this intro.
My name is Curt Jaimungal, I'm a Torontonian filmmaker with a background in mathematical
physics dedicated to the explication of the variegated terrain of theories of everything,
from a theoretical physics perspective, but as well as analyzing consciousness and
seeing its potential connection to fundamental reality, whatever that is.
Essentially, this channel is dedicated to exploring the underrived nature of reality,
the constitutional laws that govern it, provided those laws exist at all and are even knowable to us.
If you enjoy witnessing and engaging with others on the topics of psychology,
consciousness, physics, etc., the channel's themes,
then do consider going to the Discord and the subreddit, which are linked in the description.
There's also a link to the Patreon, that is patreon.com slash CURTJAIMUNGAL,
if you'd like to support this podcast, as the patrons and the sponsors are the only reasons
that I'm able to have podcasts of this quality and this depth, given that I can do this now
full-time, thanks to both the patrons and the sponsors' support.
Speaking of sponsors, there are two. The first sponsor is Brilliant.
During the winter break, I decided to brush up on some of the fundamentals of physics,
particularly with regard to information theory, as I'd like to interview Chiara Marletto on
constructor theory, which is heavily based in information theory.
Now, information theory is predicated on entropy, at least there's a fundamental formula for entropy.
So I ended up taking the Brilliant course. I challenged myself to do one lesson per day,
and I took the courses Random Variable Distributions and Knowledge slash Uncertainty.
What I loved is that despite knowing the formula for entropy, which is essentially
hammered into you as an undergraduate, it seems like it comes down from the sky arbitrarily.
And with Brilliant, for the first time, I was able to see how the formula for entropy,
which you're seeing right now, is actually extremely natural,
and it'd be strange to define it in any other manner.
There are plenty of courses, and you can even learn group theory,
which is what's being referenced when you hear that the standard model is predicated on U1
cross SU2 cross SU3. Those are Lie groups, continuous Lie groups.
Visit brilliant.org slash TOE, T-O-E, to get 20% off an annual subscription.
And I recommend that you don't stop before four lessons. I think you'll be greatly surprised at
the ease at which you can now comprehend subjects you previously had a difficult time grokking.
The second sponsor is Algo. Now, Algo is an end-to-end supply chain optimization software
company with software that helps business users optimize sales and operations,
planning to avoid stockouts, reduce return and inventory write downs while reducing
inventory investment. It's a supply chain AI that drives smart ROI, headed by Amjad Hussain,
who's been a huge supporter of this podcast since near its inception. In fact, Amjad has his own
podcast on AI and consciousness and business growth. And if you'd like to support the TOE podcast,
then visit the link in the description to see Amjad's podcast because subscribing to him,
or at least visiting, supports the TOE podcast indirectly. Thank you and enjoy.
Okay, this should be live. If you can see this, type in Animaniacs into the chat. Animaniacs.
Great. There are already 275 people watching. Firstly, it's a distinct honor to be here.
Thank you both, Don and Joscha. I appreciate it tremendously and the audience does as well.
This theories of everything project is about exploring grand unified theories and theoretical
physics, as you know, and understanding consciousness and free will. I see those,
or at least intuit that those are integrally tied. And it's those, the latter two topics that bring us
here. Don, why don't we start with your definition of free will as well as how you view consciousness.
And you mentioned that you would like to give an overview of your point of view on science and
theories of everything in general. And then Joscha, you'll join afterward and commend Donald or amend
him. And then I'll pretty much shut my mouth and allow you both to speak to one another
interjecting only seldom. Okay. Thank you, Curt. And good to see you, Joscha.
My attitude about science is sort of like what Newton famously said, right? He said
that toward the end of his career, that he thought of himself as like a little boy playing on the
seashore, looking at some nice pebbles and shells while all before him lay the vast ocean of
truth that was undiscovered. And I think that that's a good attitude for us as scientists
to have is that as much as we've done, we've really not even begun to explore the possibilities
of truth. And what's interesting is that Newton's followers famously didn't follow him on that.
In the late 19th century, a lot of Newtonians thought that it was pretty much over. They had
a theory of everything. There were a few little wrinkles. There was the problem of Michelson-Morley
experiment and blackbody radiation wasn't quite working out according to Newton, but they thought
that that was pretty minor stuff and they would figure that all out and physics was pretty much
done. And we've discovered that no, physics was hardly beginning. There was so much more
to discover. And so my attitude is that science cannot have a theory of everything in principle,
that we will always be on Newton's seashore. We'll always be like Newton, the little boy
playing with pebbles and shells while the vast truth lays undiscovered before us,
the ocean of truth. And it's for a principled reason that scientific theories, if you look at
how they're structured, we start with a good scientific theory, tells you exactly what its
assumptions are. This is what I'm assuming. These are the derivation rules that I allow.
And then everything about the theory follows from that. But that theory doesn't explain its
assumptions. The assumptions are what's assumed. So Einstein in his special theory of relativity
assumes that light travels at the same speed for all observers in all inertial reference frames.
But that theory doesn't tell you what light is. And in fact, Einstein spent his whole life
wondering what light is and toward the end of his life said, I've spent my whole life studying it
and I still have no idea what light really is. And so we're in that situation as scientists where
what we're doing is valuable. It's absolutely essential because we're being precise about our
assumptions. We're being precise about what they entail. But there's going to be a fundamental
limit. And my guess is that science, as valuable as it is, is one of the most important advances
that humanity has made, will always and only scratch the surface beyond the seashore with
Newton while the vast ocean lays undiscovered. So when we talk about theories of consciousness
and free will and so forth going forward, I do it with sort of a very modest look at my own ideas.
The ideas are going to be very much in the framework of these are the best ideas we've
come up with so far. Of course, there's going to be much, much deeper work ahead and much more to
discover ahead. So we just have to, as scientists, be precise about the current assumptions we're
making and why we're making them and what follows from them, but be completely open to radical
transformations in knowledge and radical new understandings.
Your view on consciousness and free will.
So in a nutshell, my views on consciousness are not physicalist. So
physicalist approaches will say that we will start with space-time and some of its contents,
particles, neurons, neural systems, neural networks.
And those will be, so that's a scientific theory in which those are our assumptions.
Space-time and its contents are fundamental and particular contents may be very, very important.
For example, dynamical systems on neural networks, for example. And from that, we're going to try to
boot up subjective experience. And that's perfectly a fine project to try to do. What I
would want from that physicalist approach would be not a hand wave, but a specific accomplishment.
So how do we start with dynamical systems of neural networks and come up with the taste of chocolate
or the smell of garlic or something specific? Some specific conscious experience where we say,
my scientific theory says why this dynamical system of activity in neurons or in computer
system or something like that must be the taste of chocolate. It could not be the smell of garlic.
And these are the principled reasons why. If something like that were on the table,
I would be impressed. Until then, I'm not impressed. And there's nothing on the table
yet that can do that. So that's one reason why I've been casting around and looking for a
different direction. It's not starting with the physical, but starting somewhere else.
And partly because, and we can talk about this in greater detail,
because our best scientific theories right now, namely
quantum field theory and general relativity on the one hand, and evolution of natural selection
on the other, both entail that space-time is not fundamental. Our two or three premier scientific
theories really tell us their limits. They tell us that space-time cannot be fundamental.
And so if we're going to look for a theory of consciousness,
and we start with something inside space-time, we're already starting where our best scientific
theories tell us it's not fundamental. So as a result, I've been trying to then say, well,
if space-time isn't fundamental and we don't yet know what's more fundamental,
then we're going to have to look for a theory of consciousness. And I think that's a good
example. If space-time is not fundamental and we don't yet know what's more fundamental,
why don't we first start with trying to get a mathematical theory of consciousness on its own
terms? What is consciousness? What kinds of assumptions can we make about it? And then we
can ask the question, is consciousness more fundamental than space-time? What is the
time? So, and I can go in some of the details if we want to on that model, but the big picture is
that I'm taking very seriously that evolution of a natural selection entails that none of our
sensory systems tell us the truth about objective reality, and that therefore space-time is not an
objective truth, it's just a representation of fitness payoffs. And that physicists are finding
the same thing that Nima Arkani-Hamed, for example, at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton,
basically has lectures where he says space-time is doomed and here's why. And the best physicists
are now trying to figure out what's next. Space-time has had a good run for several centuries
and it's over. Space-time is not fundamental and the contents of space-time are not fundamental.
And so we need to figure out, and he's got things, working with Juan Maldacena on things like
cosmological polytopes, they're finding structures beyond space-time from which space-time can emerge
as a projection, as a special case. But in these deeper theories, there is no time
and there is no space. But there are symmetries that are true of, for example, scattering
amplitudes data, that are true, that you can't see in space-time. They can predict the data,
but they don't use space and time as the fundamental concepts. And I think that as we start to go into
scientific theories of consciousness, we cannot ignore what our physicist colleagues are telling
us. They're telling us if you're looking for something fundamental, it's not space-time,
and in particular, it's not time. And that is a real showstopper. It's for the physicists too. I
mean, trying to think outside of the time box is not easy for the physicists. And so what do we do
if we don't have space-time, if we don't have time? So I think that that's one of the interesting
questions that we have to face. If we're going to come up with a theory of consciousness,
what do we take as fundamental in our theory? If we take anything inside space-time,
we're already sort of cutting ourselves off because we know that as physics progresses,
things inside space-time will just be shown to be secondary. So we can go into my details on
my current model of consciousness, but maybe we should talk first about the more meta ideas.
Sure. And Josje, please.
It's interesting that you start outing yourself as a
mysterionist in a way, right? The mysterionism being the position that human minds are basically
not equipped to understand how they work or how the universe works, that they're embedded in at a
very deep level. And I sometimes joke that mysterionism is the position that something
cannot be understood if it cannot be understood by Noam Chomsky.
Noam Chomsky is a mysterious with respect to the mind. At the Science of Consciousness
conference, he once gave a presentation where he talks about Descartes and then mentions that
Descartes was actually a very smart fellow because he could already anticipate stuff that would only
be discovered much, much later on. And I was perking up and wondering, my God, Chomsky is
giving this guy credit. And it turned out what he anticipated was that he was actually a very smart
fellow. And it turned out what he anticipated was that we would later, like Chomsky, discover that
the mind is unintelligible. Right? So, it's fascinating, of course, if you are one of the
smartest minds of your own generation and you see that other people don't understand things that you
understand. And there is a boundary where nobody seems to have an understanding and you crash
against it. You might think, okay, maybe there is no way that humans can do it. Not convinced that
the case is. I'm not a mysterianist at this point in my intellectual career. And it's in part because
I come from the other side. So, many of the things that people took as a given for a long time, like
space and time, appeared to me in the beginning quite mysterious. So, basically, the dissolution
of space and time was not that mysterious to me. Basically, I'm a computer scientist. I started
very, very early on in my life to program before I properly understood mathematics and before I
understood physics. And I understood how to make things in a computer. And Einstein's watch that
is ticking away and you can observe its movements and so on, but you cannot open it and you can come
up with theories what's happening inside. To me, this watch was the screen of a computer.
And I understood that there is no limit to what can be put into the computer if it has enough
resources. So, if the computer is fast enough and has enough memory, there is no pattern that cannot
be shown on the screen. There is no limit to the sequence of patterns that is to be shown on the
screen. So, any observation that I am making, if I understand it as a pattern on some kind of screen
that is visible to me, I will always be able to construct something, a mechanism that is on the
other side and produces the sequence. And now the question is, can I produce an elegant sequence?
Can I produce a minimal pattern? Can I produce something from which I think it's plausible that
it emerged by itself? And that is to me this big important question of physics. The idea of
physicalism to me is the notion that we live in a reality that is fully emergent over a coarsely
closed mechanical layer. And we are in that base reality that emerges from it. And the alternatives
to physicalism is that this base layer is somewhere else. Because even if we live in a simulation that
is created by some kind of supernatural being, something must have created the supernatural being
in its parent universe, right? So, ultimately, every supernatural event is going to have some kind of
natural cause, some kind of prime mover that is taking away in the void and producing the
patterns that we observe. And the patterns that we observe are so damn regular. And there's all
this conservation going on of information that it doesn't seem like a conspiracy to me. It seems
that we're not in a simulation. It seems that the idea that consciousness could be primary to our
reality is not true. Because consciousness being primary means that you would have to live in
somebody else's mind. That we live in some kind of conspirational simulation that somebody has set
up for us. And while that is possible, and I can in principle not exclude it, because there can be no
evidence that can ever be fully conclusive if somebody sets it up to deceive me, there is no
reason for me to believe it. Because there are not enough things happening in my reality that
counteract the notion that I live in a mechanical universe. The few things that pop up, I can still
explain this by faulty memories and psychosis. Right? So, the only thing that needs to be explained,
I was puzzling people like Turing and other thinkers, is there's a possibility that telepathy
is true. If that would be true, right, it would not be compatible with the way in which we
understand physics right now. And there's this question, is there a point at which we have to
discard physics fully and accept that you live in some kind of simulation, in some kind of dream
universe that somebody has set up, like a computer game where you can arbitrarily break causality
when it's convenient? Or is this something that we need to extend physics? Or is it just
something where our minds are playing tricks with us? And we know our minds are playing lots of
tricks with us. So, Turing considered the possibility that telepathy exists as very real
to this, to the point where he included this in his 1950 paper, Computing Machinery and
Intelligence, where he sketches out the Turing test and seriously asks what the Turing test would
have to involve for such a system, the ability to be telepathic. And if it's not, what difference
would it make? Doesn't get to the point where he assesses out loud that if telepathy is possible,
you cannot be sure which of your thoughts and feelings originate in your own brain. They could
come from somewhere else, right? So, this opens up the door to lots and lots of things. But for
the time being, I think that the evidence for telepathy is weak. And if telepathy would exist,
I would be seriously willing to consider this together with Turing. It's not clear whether we
cannot find a mechanical explanation for it. There's always going to be some kind of computer
program that explains the patterns on the screen. Now, if we think about space, to me as a kid that
was programming, the notion of a continuous space never made sense. Because it's not computable. I
cannot write something that is continuous space. And when I tried to wrap my mind around the
mathematics, the language broke. I was not able to understand how to make a point that is infinitely
small, yet fits together. If you add infinitely many of these points into a continuum,
this just doesn't work, right? But it's not a problem to make something that exactly looks
like this. It's not a problem to make a computer game that looks continuous. It's not a computer
game that produces physics that looks similar to what we can observe, at least in the simplification.
Of course, our computers are extremely inefficient when it comes to simulating the substrate layer,
the quantum mechanics that we can observe, or a layer below the quantum mechanics, because quantum
mechanics is probably not the lowest layer in which physics plays out. It's just the lowest
layer in which we can currently make observations that we can conceptualize. And this leads us to
what you also mentioned, what is a photon? I don't think that Einstein started out with the assumption
that the speed of light is fixed. I think it was a derivation that he made. He concluded that the
speed of light is fixed. And he basically, once he had this conclusion, he had implications for
the possible descriptions of space-time that emerged. Because when the speed of light is fixed,
you end up with some very interesting paradoxes if you stay in a Newtonian universe. You have
this issue, imagine you fly in a very fast spaceship, and you are shooting light out of
your flashlight inside of your spaceship. Wouldn't the speed of light necessarily add up to the speed
of the spaceship to an external observer? So wouldn't this external observer not need to
observe a different speed of light than the person traveling in the spaceship? And if the speed of
light is constant always, it means that the thing that now has to change is time or space or both.
You can still fix this if you make sure that the speed of time runs in a different way.
And this leads us to the insight that the time and space that we observe from our own perspectives
as emergent observer and whatever universe produces us are interdependent. They're not
independent of each other. The speed of light depends on the trajectory that, you know, the speed
of time depends on the trajectory that you are taking through the universe. And if you want to
think about something that could be more fundamental, we would say that the photon is a carrier of
the electromagnetic force. It's a type of boson, which means it can be described as a certain
pattern that has an integer spin. And it has the property that it is describing the potentiality
for measuring some electromagnetic interaction. So if we take space-time from the perspective of
the observer, it's the set of locations that can contain information and the set of trajectories
that the information can take. And the photon is a model of information traveling through space-time.
And what we have discovered and what Einstein also sometimes suspected is that space itself
cannot be fundamental. And there were concrete reasons to see this because what was discovered
during Einstein's career, even when he was aware of this discovery, was that there were singularities
in space-time, which means points at where the mathematics of continuous space breaks down.
So your mathematics doesn't work anymore. You have some kind of a division by zero. Something
unpleasant happens where your mathematics is no longer valid. And what Einstein saw is that
you can fix this by shifting the singularities around in our space-time model. And we can
basically put them below the carpet. We can put them in centers of mass. So in the center of mass,
there is basically something like a little black hole where mathematics doesn't work anymore. The
mathematics of space-time, where your mathematical description of that world doesn't work anymore.
And what could be more fundamental than space-time? I think it could be transitions. So
you describe the universe as some kind of state vector, a set of information, and this
information is dynamic. You have the way in which information moves between the locations.
And in this paradigm, the speed of light could be the rate at which information propagates between
locations. And this would be an upper limit of all interactions that we observe within this
lattice, where stuff is densely connected. What would be necessary to, if you have a set
of locations, some kind of graph, a causal graph, and information flowing between them,
to understand that there is causal structure? Well, you need to understand where the information comes from
to understand what it signifies, so you can model it. How can a single bit mean anything to you if
it's just a single bit, if it's not attached with the source, with the type, with the context?
So what could be a way to figure out where information comes from? Well, it needs to have
some kind of momentum, some kind of direction. To carry information about direction, and you
send this to a graph that by itself just has just locations, connections. The only way that you can
do this is if this thing is extended, if it's not just a single location to which the information
propagates, but if it's neighboring connections, and you get information that verifies it. So you
need to be in some kind of densely strung lattice for information that you can pinpoint.
Basically, you need to have something that looks like a continuous space, so you can identify
controllable structure that you can identify where stuff comes from, like a photon. And if there is
information that is traveling across distance, so to speak, that is non-local, that is not
going through densely connected local connections, but that is going over individual long-range links,
this information will look like a random fluctuation or a distant entanglement that you can
no longer track if you don't know where it originated. And this will look like something like
indeterminism from your local observer perspective. Still, it would not be in contradiction to the
preservation of information. It would still be a universe in which information is not invented,
but in which the amount of discernible information is constant. And if the universe was not in such
a way that information would be preserved, of course it would not be learnable, because it would mean
that the present state of the universe is forgetting what happened before in the universe.
It gets disconnected, the worldline of the universe just gets disconnected. And so from an epistemological
perspective, we can only learn the aspects of the universe that look like they are conserved.
If there are things in the universe that are not conserved, then they will not be intelligible to us.
And of course it's conceivable that the universe is some kind of automaton that forgets information.
Another thing that shows us that space-time cannot be fundamental, besides a well-theorized
which destroys the notion of locality, is the notion of the collapse of the wave function.
Basically, this collapse of the wave function is the point in the history of an observer beyond
which we cannot obtain a model of locations of events in time and space.
Beyond that point, it's no longer not just that we don't have enough information to construct it,
but it makes no sense anymore to assume that the photon was at a particular point when it
went to the double slit. At this point, the space-time model breaks down. The space-time
model is a mathematical abstraction that works relatively well to look at things happening in
the limit. But it's not a model that can be fundamental, I think. But I'm not a physicist,
so I'm not actually qualified to have these opinions. This is just what it looks like to
me as a computer scientist who tries to understand the mind and thinks like Donald, that we have to
understand a certain degree of physics to make sure that our theories of consciousness are tight
and that they make sense. And we have to understand in which way they could possibly
relate to physics. I'm less convinced that Donald, that a deep understanding of physics is necessary
or that physics is going to teach us about consciousness, in part because I don't think that
consciousness is that mysterious anymore. I spent a lot of time in my life thinking that it was
mysterious, but it seems to be a riddle that can be solved. And basically, I think that there's some
aspects to consciousness, for instance, that you're observing yourself to be observing,
but consciousness is something that is entirely virtual. It's not a physical thing.
Electrons, photons, physical entities, neurons, brains cannot be conscious. They're just
mechanisms. And what we can see is that the elements of our consciousness are not mechanical,
they're magical somehow. There is magic happening. And if there is magic happening, it means that
it's an a-causal structure. It's something that has been made on some kind of causal loom,
but that is not necessarily built in the same mechanical way as physics is built.
It's a story. It's a tale being told by a physical system to itself. And if you think about
organisms, you often think of them as physical systems, and then neither, right? The organism
doesn't exist. It's not the same, if you think about it. What exists are cells that interact
with each other, and even the cells don't really exist. What exists are molecules, and even the
molecules don't really exist, right? They're all layers of descriptions. They're models that we can
make because they are coherent. They hold to some degree. It might be frazzling out at the boundaries,
but there are ways of thinking about the flow of information in the universe.
And the organism is a coherent pattern that we observe in the interaction between cells.
And the cells have been set up by evolution to interact in this coherent pattern because
when they interact, as if they were driven by a single spirit, by a single target, by a single
telos, and if their behavior is coherent and consistent, that are state-building, then they
have an advantage over cells which don't do that and just fight for themselves because together
they can play longer games. By playing longer games, they can occupy niches in nature that cannot
be occupied by control systems that play shorter games. And this is the benefit that organisms have,
these coordinations between cells. And an organism is a function that describes this pattern in the
cells. And the organism is facilitated by information processing across cells, among other things.
To coordinate its interactions, the organism needs to have something like a telegraph network
by which it's able to make models of reality and coordinate them between the cells and coordinate
the behavior of the cells. And in animals, this telegraph system is facilitated in large part by
the nervous system. It would not be necessary that the nervous system, basically every cell type, can
do this. But if you want to make it fast, you need to have specialized cells that have a very quick,
expensive metabolism and can send information over very long distances very quickly, which other cell
types cannot. So, neurons are a specific type of cells that allow particular kinds of information
processing. And this information processing has the property that it can put stuff on the screen.
So, it's some kind of computer. It's a thing that can produce arbitrary sequences of patterns if it
discovers a suitable function to produce them and implement them in the distributed networks of cells.
And part of what they're doing is that they create a story about a being that lives in the outside
world. And in our culture, we have difficulty understanding how that is, because we, in our
culture, as a default, teach our kids that what they see is the physical world. And the physical
world has sounds and colors and so on. Only much later, we tell them, well, it's slightly more
complicated and sounds and color are not actually in physics. Everything that you consider to be
sounds and colors is photons. Photons make electromagnetic interaction, which let air
molecules push against each other so they can form regular waves. And colors are local dimensions that
you get by measuring or sampling the frequency of the electromagnetic spectrum using different
receptor types and making a model of them using polar coordinates. So, this is something that
we don't tell the story fully to our children, which makes it even more confusing. And then we
tell them photons are actually not little billiard balls, but they are regions in the space-time that
have a potential for electromagnetic interaction. And this space that you're talking about is the
photonic space. It's the space where you can possibly have photon interactions. For some reason,
it's three-dimensional. And maybe there are other spaces that are not three-dimensional, and maybe
in these spaces, you cannot have interacting matter in the same way. Because maybe in order to get
stable objects, you need to make little knots in the electromagnetic structure or in the spatial
structure, and you cannot make knots in 2D and in 4D, they fall apart. So, maybe that's the reason.
Or maybe there's another one, and we haven't completely figured it out yet. And there are
some candidates that explain why the space that we are in is three-dimensional. So, why is it that
we are interacting with the photonic space and not with the others? Why are the others not seeming to
form a connected space in this connected lattice? But we don't know the answer yet. At least, I'm
not aware of the book that is sketching out the answer. And if I stumble on it, I pray that I
understand it. But I think that there are other cultures that have a better intuitive understanding
of what consciousness is. And if you look around, you find that some cultures don't find consciousness
mysterious. I even suspect that in the core of our own culture, before the Tower of Babel that
destroyed the shared understanding, it's still in there. So, a little bit obsessed these days with
thinking about Genesis in the Bible and read this epistemologically correct, not as a myth that is
stand-in for an origin theory until real science comes along, but as something that is literally
true. So, what would that mean? I'm talking about the first book. I'm talking about the book that
starts out with the creation of sky and darkness and heaven and earth and so on. And the thing with
this story, if you take it literally the way in which Christianity interprets it, it's a story
about a supernatural being creating a physical universe. And what's wrong with the story is that
whoever tells it to you had no evidence that it was true. So, there is no claim. If somebody makes
a claim without evidence, you don't have to listen. It could be interesting as a story for cultural
reference, or it could be interesting as an idea for something that you could test. But if it's
in principle not testable, this person cannot have that evidence. There is no secret source of
knowledge that this person had. There is in principle nothing that some other person can
have this with some kind of back channel by talking to a burning bush that would constitute
a valid experiment. So, this reading makes no sense. It would never make any sense, but it could
make sense, especially if you understand that sky and ground and light and sound and plants and
animals and their names don't actually exist in physics. They only exist in our mind as a
division of the universe into separate objects, so they become intelligible to us. And the way in
which we construct these objects is inside of the mind. So, the creation of the universe that is
being described in Genesis is not the physicalist universe with quantum mechanics. It's the creation
of the experiential universe in which we are actually in, in which we find ourselves to be in.
And the first thing that the mind is discovering when it creates this universe is how to make light,
right? How to create neural oscillators that are creating a contrast between light and darkness.
So, separate the light from the darkness and then organize this into multiple dimensions until you
get a space. And then you align the space with the information from your vestibular organs and what
you get is the two-dimensional plane of the ground and the three-dimensional space of the sky above it.
Right? So, after you create light and darkness, you create, literally, every mind does this in
their cognitive development, the sky and the ground. And then you discover the objects in it. So, you
basically learn how to model materials in your mind. So, you have solids and you have liquids
and you have organic shapes and you have animated agents. And then you discover features that you
cannot interact with, like celestial bodies, and anchor them in the world and you learn how to
navigate this world. And then you discover all the plants and the animals and you construct them in
your mind and you associate them all with their names. So, again, of course, not a feature of the
physical world. They are socially exchanged, these names and so on. We create this world together.
And then, last but not least, we create a person. So, the thing that creates it is not a person yet.
It's a mind that exists before a person is around. We don't remember how we made light.
We don't remember how we discovered the sky and the ground in the first space. This was another
observing agent in our own brain. And this observing agent in our own brain, at some point,
discovers the needs of a person, of the needs of an organism, the organism that its brain
is embedded in. And it creates a model of that, too. So, it creates an agent that is
observing this universe, that is embedded in this universe, because this first observer in our own
mind is discovering that such an entity exists. It's a useful model to describe reality, that
there is a person that has needs and desires and social embedding and dreams and hopes and memories
and expectations. And it will create a story of that. And that story is just as real as the trees
that exist in our mind as imaginations or the trees or the forest and beyond the horizon. And
as real as the sky and the clouds and the colors and so on. But they're all virtual. They're all
simulacra. They all exist to tell a story to the organism that is useful for the organism to model
the world. And this part where we become a person seems to be happening, I think, around the age of
one and a half to two and a half, roughly, in most children that I observed. And at this point,
a person that is different from before emerges in their mind. It's not that there is nobody there
before. It's just that the thing before is different. And you notice that there is a gap
in their memories. They have memories when they're in their first year when you talk to them,
where they remember what happened and have expectations already. But later on, there is
this point where they don't remember these things anymore. It's very weird. And most people, when
they think back, don't have memories that they can consciously access before they're like two and a
half years old. And so I wonder if this transition is the result of just a re-indexing of memories
due to our newfound linguistic ability. So if we can later on no longer access these memories,
or if it's really just basically a new agent that is created by the first agent in its own image
as an observer that is aware of the fact that it's observing. But in a different way,
as men and women, as something that thinks it's a person, that thinks it's a human being. And I'm
not a human being. I realize that at some level. I don't have an identity as a human being. This is
a story that my mind tells itself. It's an additional thing. My consciousness doesn't
have an identity. My consciousness is also not of the nature that it's the same as everybody else's
consciousness. The question, do we all have the same consciousness looking through different eyes
or with separate consciousnesses, is in some sense as meaningless as the question of asking, is the
text editor that you're running onto your computer the same text editor that everybody else runs on
their computer? Or is it a different one? The program word is in some sense a natural law. If
you put the circuits of your computer in the same functional configuration, then those things are
going to happen with the circuits of your computer and they will afford the following interactions.
But the program word doesn't have an identity. And it's also not that it has no identity in
the sense it's just not a meaningful category to apply to it. In the same sense, my consciousness
is not in this category that would have an identity or none. So it's not something that
is shared with others. And it's not something that is separate from others. It's a principle
that applies to the observation. And when the consciousness gets tied to a self-model,
then it becomes perspectival and I have an identity and so on. But this identity is a
particular kind of model that my organism tells itself by changing certain factors in my own brain.
Okay. Let's let Don respond.
Yeah. Well, there's quite a bit there. So on the nature of the physical world and computation
and the finiteness versus continuity of space-time and so forth, I think that the work,
you know, Gödel's incompleteness theorem is very relevant here. That the notion of truth
is far deeper than the notion of proof. There are any system, any computational system will have
things that it can prove, but there will be truths that that computational system cannot access.
And if you add a new truth of, you know, like Gödel's statement to your set of axioms,
then there'll be yet more truths that cannot be accessed from that. And so what you can compute
is always going to be trivial to what is true. There will always be, as far as I can tell,
again, it's sort of like Newton's notion of we're at the seashore and the vast ocean of
of reality of the truths, he actually used the word truth, the vast ocean of truths is out there
beyond what we can compute. And every truth that you add to your base for computation doesn't solve
the problem. And you might say, well, that's true, you know, of abstract mathematics, but that's not
true of physics. I mean, physics itself is computable, but that there's some recent work
suggesting that that's not the case. So Tony Kubit, a physicist, and his colleagues
have recently proved that a very important problem to condensed matter physicists
called the spectral gap problem is not computable. And that's a stunning result.
And they also suspect, and they're working on this, they haven't proven this yet, but that
something that's a big open problem, I think the Millennium Prize Committee has, this is one of
their problems, is to understand the Yang-Mills gas gap problem, which is, you know, why do
photons and gravitons have no mass, but the recarious of the strong weak force do have mass?
And Kubit and his collaborators think, again, that we're going to find that something
non-computational is going on here. It's not decidable. And my guess is that this is just
the beginning, that we're going to find that as powerful as computation is, and, you know,
I was in the artificial intelligence lab at MIT for my PhD, and I'm all for AI and for computation,
and I, you know, I think it's fabulous what computation can do. And the naysayers who
think that the computation can't do amazing things and artificial intelligence can have
important limits that, I think that the naysayers, I disagree with the naysayers.
On the other hand, I do believe Gödel's incompleteness theorem is correct,
and I do think that the notion of truth is just vastly, that the notion, the set of truths,
I'll put it this way, the set of things that we can prove from any system is essentially probability
zero in the set of all truths. In other words, we're always going to be, as I said,
we're always going to be, as Newton said, on the seashore with computation, and it's for
principled reasons. So it's not a mysterianism that's not founded, it's saying our best theories
tell us that truth and proof are not the same thing, and that proofs will always only leave
you on the seashore. And so that's why, I mean, I didn't like that conclusion, but, you know,
Gödel proved it, and now physicists are finding it in, you know, the spectral gap, and so as much
as I like computation, I'm a computer scientist myself, as much as I like computation, I have to
defer to the mathematical proofs that say computation goes thus far and no further,
then ask myself, okay, how can, so my conceptual system then is itself just a symbolic system.
With derivation rules. So what I can compute by my thought is also going to be limited,
which is why I was saying up front what I think about scientific theories, right? Scientific
theories are going to have these limitations. We will put down a set of axioms, each theory,
a good scientific theory will tell you exactly what it assumes, and it will also give you a hint
about the kind of derivations that you can give from those assumptions, and then you use, you find
what that theory will entail. But our best theories, like quantum theory and relativity,
and evolution of natural selection, the best theories will also tell you where they stop.
They will say we go this far and no further. And for example, physics tells us that
space-time itself cannot be fundamental, that the very notion of space-time cannot be fundamental,
which is stunning because physics for several centuries has essentially been the study of what
happens in space and time. And so to say that space-time is not fundamental means that the
physicists have to redefine what physics is about. And that's what, for example, Juan Maldacena and
Nimar Kani-Hamed are trying to do with things like the cosmological polytope and amplituhedron
and so forth. They're finding structures where there are no Hilbert spaces, so there's no quantum
theory, there is no time, there is no space, there are these positive geometries, and what you find
is you can predict events in space-time, like scattering processes that you see at the Large
Hadron Collider, you can predict them, and in fact you can actually compute them in some sense
better than if you assume space-time. So they're finding that, you know, if you use Feynman
diagrams and try to compute scattering amplitudes for two gluons coming in and four gluons
scattering out using the standard quantum field theoretic approaches where space and time is
assumed, you get hundreds of pages of algebra and it's a mess. Whereas if you let go of space-time
and look at these structures with symmetries that cannot be expressed in space-time, dual conformal
symmetry, then you find that the same scattering amplitudes can be processed in just two or three
terms that you can write down pen and paper on a sheet of paper. So all of a sudden, so what
they're seeing is space-time has had a good run, but if you force yourself to stick with space-time,
then the math is ugly, you get hundreds of pages of algebra to compute scattering amplitudes, you
can't see the symmetries that are there, like dual conformal symmetry. If you let go of space-time,
you're finding these amazing structures that they don't know what they're about,
but all of a sudden you see the right symmetries and the computations become trivial.
So there's some big hint that I think on a couple fronts from Gerdl and from the work by Tony Kubit
and his team that the computation is as powerful as it is and as much as I love it as an AI person
and a cognitive scientist, it's always going to be on the seashore with Newton. And when we let go
of space-time, we're still of course as theorists always going to have a finite set of axioms and
derivations about, you know, like the cosmological polytope and so forth that Nima and Juan are
finding. We're still going to have a finite set of concepts and derivations, so we're not going
to get around Gerdl's incompleteness theorem, but at least we're going beyond the notion of time,
which is really critical. And that also cuts at the computational issues, pretty interesting.
Computational complexity is about, you know, a lot of it is about time complexity.
And what physicists are telling us is that ultimately we're going to have to let go of
the notion of time. And so as computer scientists, we're going to have to rethink
complexity issues when the very notion of time itself isn't fundamental. So that's going to be
a real kicker for us in computer science. How do we think about complexity issues when time itself
is not the right way to think about things? And therefore the sequence of computations in time
is not the right way to think about things. We have some really deep thinking to do ahead.
But where I think we share some common ground, Joscha, is I think that a lot of
our experiences and so forth, our models that we built, I think that we are building internal
models. But the question is, what is the apparatus that's building those models?
And I'm saying it's nothing inside space and time. So in particular, I'll be very, very explicit. I
don't think that neurons exist when they're not perceived. I don't think space-time exists when
it's not perceived. I think neurons and space-time and even particles are simply data structures
that we use. And there's a formulation of quantum theory that's very similar to this. It's called
cubism, quantum Bayesianism, Chris Fuchs and David Merman, where they take this point of view that
it's the every act of observation in physics, every experiment that you do is an act of fact creation.
Right? It's not that there are pre-existing particles with pre-existing states and you're
measuring those states. Rather, they're subjective Bayesians. So all the probabilities in quantum
theory are subjective probabilities. They're not objective probabilities. And every outcome is a
fact creation. And they do have, I mean, Chris Fuchs has a very interesting 2010 paper
called Cubism that I highly recommend. And in that paper, he actually points to a very interesting
quantum discovery that there's a sequence of what's proven is that even if you know what the
outcome of your experiment is going to be with probability one, that does not entail that the
outcome is there and exists independent of your observation. That's a stunning thing to say.
It's a probability one, you know, with probability one, what you're going to measure. And yet you can
prove with quantum mechanics that it's impossible that the outcome was there, the value existed
before you made the measurement. So that the, it's really the case that the acts of observation
are fact creations, not fact discoveries. So most of the work that's done in consciousness
assumes, and I would say this is 99% of the theories that I've seen in consciousness,
assume that space-time is fundamental, assume that physical particles are fundamental,
and that somehow neural activity in humans and perhaps other kinds of more complex activity in
AIs creates consciousness. But the very founding assumptions that space-time is fundamental,
that neurons exist when they're not perceived, contradicts our best physics. And it also
contradicts evolution of natural selection, which is very, very clear. Natural selection makes it
very clear that the probability is zero, that the sensory systems of any organism tell them any
truths about objective reality. What they tell organisms, sensory systems evolved to tell
organisms how to behave in order to stay alive, period. That's it. And so that gives you a user
interface for staying alive, but gives you no access to the truth. And that fits with what
physics is telling us, that space-time is a user interface, but it's not the final truth.
And so what I want from a theory of consciousness as a scientist is I want a clear statement of
what am I assuming? What are the exact things that my theory takes as primitive?
What are the exact rules that allow me to derive things from those primitives? And how exactly do
I get the taste of chocolate from that? That's what I'm looking for from a theory of consciousness,
precise statement of exactly what I'm assuming up front with mathematical precision, and then
precise derivation. If I'm not taking the taste of chocolate as fundamental, if I'm saying that
somehow some dynamical system is going to give it to me, then I want to know exactly which
dynamical system is giving me the taste of chocolate and why that dynamical system could
not be the smell of garlic. I want to know exactly. Otherwise, there's no real science on the table
at all. So that's what I'm looking for, is theories that say exactly what the assumptions are
and tell me exactly for at least one specific conscious experience, how that conscious experience
must be derived in that way. And so that's where I'm coming from on those.
Now, in the case of cells and the brain, I would just mention something that's very interesting,
that you probably know about Mike Levin's work. And he's finding that cells, not just neurons,
but any cell in animals that, in fact, outside of the brain, they can learn and they can compute
and they can do morphogenesis of the cell's body. They use gap junction, communication, electric.
So they're effectively doing what neurons do, but in a very, very different way. And this is,
all cells can communicate in this way with gap junctions and so forth. So I suspect that
we're going to find that neurons aren't special in the sense of being information processors,
that information processing, and this seems to be where Mike is heading, is that information
processing is happening in what he calls these bioelectric fields, even if there are no neurons,
and that they can learn, they can retain memories, and they can be very intelligent.
So even as neuroscientists, we may find that we'll have to expand our horizons beyond neuroscience
and understand, if I were a reductionist and trying to do biological reduction, I would,
at this point with Mike Levin's stuff, be interested to say, well, maybe I wouldn't
necessarily reduce consciousness to neural activity. Maybe these gap junctions and the
computations that cells can do would also be a suitable format. But again, I'm not a
reductionist in that sense, but I'll stop unless you respond, Josche.
Thank you. You went very far and wide and tried to be a little bit more concise.
Let's start out with Gödel. Gödel's proof had a very profound and not necessarily very positive
influence on philosophy. And basically, Lukács and others in philosophy opened up a tradition
that the underlying current is that what Gödel has shown is that mathematics is impotent
to describe reality. And therefore, reality can only be described by people who don't really know
mathematics, that is philosophers. So philosophers like that intuition. But it implies that there is
something beyond mathematics that allows you to make sense of things that assign truth. And
slightly deeper, when you say that you like computation and you value it and so on, and you
see its limits, it implies that you see what comes beyond these limits and you're using that thing
beyond the limits to think. And I don't think that you are. Everything in my own mind that I can
observe, when I observe myself perceiving, when I perceive myself reflecting, when I perceive myself
reasoning, is computational. It means that I go from state to state in a somewhat deterministic
way. The random parts are just deleting bits that I computed before, so I have to do it again. The
randomness and determinism doesn't help me. So the part of my mind that is relevant to my thinking
is fundamentally computational. What Gödel discovered, and is often misunderstood, and also
by Gödel himself, is a very important thing. What Gödel has discovered is not that truth is deeper
than proof. That was in some sense the suspicion which he started with. He knew that, in his view,
that truth is platonic, that things can be true or not regardless of whether we find out or whether
it can be found out. And he hoped to find a notion of truth, of proof, that could reach truth.
And he found that it couldn't, and he found this in a devastating way.
And he drew the conclusion that there is truth that cannot be found with mathematics.
And the opposite is true. There is no deeper notion of truth than proof. You see,
a perception cannot be true or false. Perception just is. Physical events out there in the universe
cannot be true or false. They just are. A pattern that you observe is not true or false, it just is.
Right? You could be erroneously thinking that you're perceiving a pattern when you don't,
because you're suffering from false memory or a delusion or whatever that makes your thinking
or perception inconsistent. But the pattern itself is not true or false. It's an interpretation that
can be true or false. And the interpretation has to be in a symbolic language to have the property
that can be true or false. A perceptual interpretation by itself is not true or false,
it just is. Right? So in order to be true or false, you need to have a language. And the
language needs to be defined in such a way that truth can be established. And the process of
establishing truth is a computation. And there are two types of languages in which truth can be
defined. And the language of classical mathematics is a stateless language. It's one where time
doesn't exist, where everything happens all at once or in some kind of eternal moment. So if you
want to go from state to state in this language of eternal mathematics, in the stateless language,
you just assign an index and then you iterate over the index and you do this in a single instant,
in one moment. And the stateless mathematics has a very beautiful property. It allows you to deal
with infinities, because you can now construct functions that take infinitely many arguments in
a single step, perform an operation over them in a single step, and give the result back in a single
step. It's a language in which you can assign a value to pi. Right? In the computational system,
you cannot really assign a value to pi. You can have a function that gives you digit by digit,
but you never get to the latest last digit. It also means that pi can never be written down
in such a way that you can have a process that relies on knowing all the digits of pi and consumes
them to tune the outcome of some physical process. If you make the switch to a stateful language,
in which you can only go from step to step, you're losing certain things. You're losing
the ability to treat pi as a value. Pi is now suddenly a function that you can only approximate
to a certain degree. And many other things stop being values. You get a fundamental difference
between a value and a function. A value is something that you have already computed,
that you know how to compute by extension. And this means that also that truth changes. Truth
is no longer this platonic thing that precedes mathematics and where we can use mathematics as a
tool to figure it out. It has to be contingent on the language in which you use it. If your language
has internal contradictions, then truth becomes impossible to determine. Right? You get into
areas in this language where it falls apart. You can no longer use it to express coherent
thoughts about reality and coherent models about reality. You can never make statements in the
language that you can prove outside of the language. So you cannot use your language to
prove things that cannot be described in the language. Your only hope to prove statements
about the universe that you exist in in a language is that you are able to recreate the observations
that you make inside of the language, which means you recreate a model of the universe that is so
good that it gives you what you observe currently. And then you can hope that the statements that you
make in your language capture something about the reality outside of you that gives rise to
your observations. Of course, you cannot know because it could also be different. But if your
language is not able to produce what's on your screen, then your language is wrong. And Hilbert
gave out this task to mathematicians to find a machine, any kind of structural sound language,
that is able to run the semantics of mathematics without breaking. And what Gödel discovered is
that the semantics of stateless mathematics cannot be recovered. If you assume that there is a
solution to get stateless mathematics to work, you will run into contradictions of the way that Gödel
discovered. But there is a way out. You just drop the notion of truth that is independent of the
sequence of operations, the number of the set of steps that you took, the algorithm that you took,
to get to your result. It means that when you have a self-referential statement like this sentence is
false, right, this is a sentence that of the type that Gödel has shown leads into contradictions,
if you assume that there is a stable notion of truth that is stateless. If you accept that truth
is not necessarily a stable value and you look at the sentence, then as long as you look at it,
the truth value will fluctuate. Because the assumption that the sentence is true will lead to
the sentence being false and vice versa. So suddenly you have no longer a stable truth
predicate. And it just means that the property of the languages in which you can actually deal
with truth and assign it is that under some circumstances the truth predicate will not be stable.
And it's fine. There's nothing wrong with that. And this same thing applies to the Entscheidungsproblem
that Turing was dealing with when he came to the Harting problem. He defined originally the
Turing machine in such a way that we could translate stateless mathematics into algorithms.
And this might require that you have to go through an infinite sequence of steps.
And if you make this assumption that you sometimes in order to get to truth you have
to go through an infinite sequence of steps, you run into contradictions. So you might use an
unbounded sequence of steps that gives you continuously results. That's fine. But you cannot
accept that anything exists in any kind of universe that has causal structure that is going to produce
you a solution to the Harting problem, which would give you back stateless mathematics.
So basically what Gödel and Turing have shown is that stateless mathematics doesn't work.
And when we look back at the history of mathematics, mathematicians have never used
stateless mathematics. They only pretended to. Whenever they actually wanted to compute
something with mathematics, they under the hood used stateful descriptions. They never took in
infinitely many arguments and performed infinitely many operations on them. And the intuition
and the intuition that stateless mathematics makes sense is because we had this intuition
that continuity, that space and time in a continuous fashion exist. Why do we have this
intuition? Well, that's pretty easy to answer, right? The number of things that we interact
with, if we zoom in, we find that they are discrete. All our observations have a discrete
resolution in time and in space. All our knowledge that we store about these observables is as a
discrete number of bits that we can assign to them. There is only a finite number of information
that we can access and that we can deal with as an observer that is embedded in this universe.
So everything was discrete to begin with, but it's too many parts to count.
If you deal with too many parts to count, the insight that a number of atoms that you are in
an ocean is a finite bounded number doesn't help you at all because it's still almost infinite from
the perspective of an observer. So when you want to describe what the ocean is doing, it doesn't help
to count the molecules in it and to assign locations to them and model the interactions.
It doesn't work. There is too much. So when you look at the dynamics of too many parts to count,
you're looking for operations that converge in the limit, which means they behave quite similar
whether you're using a trillion or 10 trillion or a gazillion particles. Once you have
these operators that give you the same dynamics under all circumstances, when you take more and
more elements to them, this part of mathematics that describes the convergent operators,
that's geometry. And some of geometry is uncomputable, so you can only approximate it.
But our brain has discovered geometry to deal with a world of too many parts to count.
And this plays into what you're pointing out when you say that our perception doesn't give us
reality, it gives us something that we can work with. Of course, the reality that we are embedded
in has too many parts to count. We need a different reality. We need one that we can actually handle,
even if it's not computable and can only be approximated. And this experiential reality is a
very coarse simplification. It's about as coarse as a gaming engine is when you play a computer
game as compared to real physics. It's not much better than that. In many ways, it's even worse,
which you can verify if you put yourself into a lucid dream and look at the fidelity of what your
brain is able to generate. Light switches will usually not work. You will not be able to read
the same stuff twice on the same page when you imagine it and so on. There's only so many bits
in your working memory. The fidelity of what your perceptual system can track and imagine is limited.
It's relatively easy to overcome that. I don't really know what the number of bits in my working
memory is, and I would be very curious to find out. But it's not as big as I thought when I was
a child. It's not infinite. It's not unlimited. Perception of infinity is super easy to generate
when your mind is very finite. It's super easy to overwhelm my finite resolution mind.
So this deep thing that Gödel misunderstood, that Gödel has not discovered that mathematics cannot
reach truth, but that truth is no more than the result of a sequence of steps that is compressing
a statement to axioms losslessly. It doesn't go beyond that. That was the deep insight, and it's
one that basically has not percolated in most areas of philosophy and even physics yet, because
the physicists have checked out the code base for mathematics before that result was obtained and
understood. So basically, we need to switch from continuous stateless mathematics to constructive
mathematics that was not understood back then. And it needs to be understood now. So basically, my
question to somebody like Donald would not be so much how to explain the spectral gap
problem, because I think problems of this case, of this type, are with the result of using continuous
notions of space-time and infinities and assuming them as given. So there's a statement about certain
theories that are expressed in a language that has inconsistencies. And in this language, with these
inconsistencies, you get to the point that you cannot get certain results. There's also an issue
of computational irreducibility, which is difficult to understand in stateless mathematics.
Computational irreducibility is a property of a system. That means that you cannot obtain the
state of the system without running the system to that point. There is no way to predict the system
except by taking the system, all its detail and fidelity, and going through the sequence of steps.
So you cannot predict what the universe is going to do when the universe is computationally
irreducible. You're going to predict some things, but not all of things. And these some things only
with a certain degree of certainty, because you can often not insulate them from the parts that
you cannot predict, because they are computationally irreducible. In a universe that is played out and
implemented in a stateless language, that is a confusing property, because the cost of computation
doesn't play a role when you are in a stateless universe. In a stateful universe, the number of
state transitions that your model needs to make plays a certain role. And this spectra of
computational irreducibility dooms large. It means that you cannot compute things for practical reasons,
because you don't have enough information yet, and you cannot have information to make that
prediction. But there is no deep miracle that is not caused by the language when you discover that
the spectral gap problem is incomputable. So my question to Donald would be, if you think that
there is a limit to computation that you can see, and beyond you would still do something and make
statements, what is it that you use to make statements beyond the limits of computation?
What parts of your mind are you drawing from when you make statements beyond what a computational
system can derive? Right. So, well, one way of trying to focus this would be to talk about
the integers versus the real numbers and the rational numbers. So from your point of view, Joscha,
is it, do you think that, so for example, if we look at just the set of all functions from
the integers to the integers, right, it's trivial to show that that's not countable.
So, yet Turing showed that this set of computable functions is countable, the set of Turing
machines is countable. So in that simple example, just to make things very, very concrete,
the set of all functions from the integers to the integers isn't countable, the Turing
computable functions are countable. And so there's a sense in which the Turing computable
functions have measure zero. They have a, they're a probability zero in the set of all
of all functions. So do we want to conclude from this computationalist point of view that
all those other functions don't exist, that we're sort of, when I, so you're saying those functions,
so real numbers don't exist. Real numbers don't. Yes, for something to exist, it has to
be implemented. If it's something is not implemented anywhere, it doesn't make sense
to claim that it exists. I think it's a confusion of the notion of existence to say that something
that is not implemented and is not implementable could exist. The things that produce patterns
that we observe in order to exist, they need to be implemented, right? So you could say,
does the financial system exist? Well, it exists to the degree that it's implemented.
There are some boundaries where we project it and it's not actually implemented and where it
doesn't actually exist only in some cause approximation, but by and large, something
exists, right? Some causal structure is implemented here. The set of all the functions between the
integers is not implementable. Therefore, it doesn't exist. It's something that you can
specify. And this difference between specification and existence is something that is very obvious
to a computer scientist and sometimes not obvious to a traditional mathematician.
There is stuff that you can specify that makes no sense. It is only specifiable in your language,
but that's because your language is much more permissible than the set of things that can exist.
And computation is less permissible. Computation only permits you to build things that can actually
exist. If you can build things that cannot exist, it's a problem of your language in which you're
building things. It's not a problem of reality. Just confused. I have a comment. This one's from
Professor Edward Lee of Berkeley, and it may provide some insight and you both can tell us
your thoughts on this. So this is from Professor Edward Lee of Berkeley. This question is a major
theme in the second half of my book, Plato and the Nerd. UTMs, so universal Turing machines,
have the following properties. Number one, their operation is a sequence of discrete steps. Number
two, the data comes from a countable set. Number three, that sequence terminates. It is a huge leap
of faith to assume that physical processes have any of these constraints. I show in Plato and the
Nerd that the hypothesis that physical processes all have these properties is actually untestable.
I remember earlier, Joscha, you mentioned that if it's untestable and you can't provide evidence for
it, then perhaps it shouldn't be talked about. So this reminded me of this. And he says in brackets,
this follows from an information theorem due to Claude Shannon known as the channel capacity
theorem. The converse hypothesis that the physical world is not so constrained is also
untestable by experiment. But I argue in Plato and the Nerd that the converse hypothesis leads
to simpler models of the universe and therefore is a better choice by Occam's razor. My claim is
that universal Turing machines as realized on today's computers are simulations, quote unquote,
of a process that is fundamentally non-algorithmic. So I just want to place that out there and
perhaps you can use that as a jumping off board, Donald and then Joscha.
Very interesting. I'll want to read that book and make sure I understand what Professor Lee is
saying. That's quite interesting. So Plato and the Nerd. I'll be interviewing Edward at some
point in the next few weeks as well. Oh, very good. Yeah. That's really
quick because these are very, very deep issues. It seems to me that this also interacts with what
the physicists are telling us that there is no time fundamentally. So if time is not fundamental,
then these computational issues where there are fundamental limits to what can be computed because
we're assuming time, a sequence of... So in computer simulations, computer algorithms,
we're assuming a sequence in time of computations that can be... And the kinds of
limits that Joscha is talking about, it seems to me, are a consequence of assuming time to
be fundamental. And if we have to go to a physics in which time is not fundamental,
then that places this whole conversation in a completely different context. And so
what we may be pointing to is time has been a very useful and helpful thing for physics for
several centuries. And now the hard work that we have to do is to understand how to go beyond the
notion of time. And when we go beyond the notion of time, will the kind of discussion we're having
right now be fundamentally revised? The computational versus non-computational
notions, we may have to really revise how our whole conversation is going to be.
Our whole conversation here is going. I'd be very interested in what Joscha has to say on that.
Thank you. Also, thanks, Edward Lee, for your argument. I concur with you that it's in principle
not testable what physics is really like. What we can only say is which theory that we can come up
with is more elegant. A small thing, I think that this notion that the Turing machine has to get to
result after a finite sequence of steps might be a mistake in the sense in which Turing machines
were originally defined. So basically, a computer that can be built is not a Turing machine in this
sense, but it's always a finite state machine. And in a finite state machine, you can have a
sequence of steps that is unbounded, that doesn't stop, and that gives you more and more digits of
pi while you're looking at. In a sense, it doesn't come to a conclusion if you want to compute
physics, but it's not a problem to build a computer that as long as it runs gives you more digits of
pi. And so I think from a formal perspective, it doesn't make much of a difference because you can
easily fix it. But it's important if you think about your intuitions about how things work or
the proofs that you make in other contexts that the value of computation doesn't hinge on there
being a finite number of steps until a computation that is going to give you a result that was
formulated in classical mathematics terminates. But that it means that everything that you get
is the result of finite interactions. And if you assume that infinite interactions are possible,
you run into the difficulties that Gödel and Turing have discovered, which means that your
theories no longer work. They no longer make sense. And different from Edward, and maybe I'm
doing him injustice here, I haven't read this book, is so I would say that it's much more elegant from
the perspective of Horkheim's razor to describe reality in a language that doesn't break.
Because if your language breaks and you still try to make a model of reality, it's going to be
arbitrarily expensive. It doesn't work. You have to find a language that works. So if we find that
the languages in which we can describe reality have to be computational languages because the
others lead into contradictions, then we have to use the computational languages. That's the
situation that I find myself to be in. This doesn't mean that I can know what physics is like. It just
means that all the physics that I can talk about without my language breaking has to play out in
this way. The notion of what is time, so coming back to Donald, is very important. There are two
notions of time. One is this intuitive notion that we have as human beings, which is basically
this Newtonian time, this time where clocks run the same speed everywhere and so on. And it
describes the transition of the universe from the past into the future via the present.
And this notion of time is somewhat similar to the notion of the state transition in your
computer, except that the state transition in a computer has some kind of global clock where
everything in the computer goes from state to state all at once and progresses to the next step.
But what we see in our universe is that it only makes sense if we assume that it's dynamic.
If the universe would just be a decoupled sequence of states without a transition function, there
would not be any law that we can discover. There is nothing that we can control. Organisms would
not exist in the way in which they do. So from the observations that we make, we have to assume
that the transitions in the universe are somehow fundamental, that the universe is moving. And state
transitions seem to be crucial in order to be able to understand the universe. But there is some
notion of transition, and this notion of transition is much more basic than time. And the time that
we are talking about when we see that time is not fundamental in the notion of spacetime is relativistic
time. The relativistic time is what the universe looks like to a relativistic observer.
And we can obtain relativistic time if we understand that what we perceive as time is
basically the speed of the clocks in our environment. And the speed of the clocks that
we observe depend on our own speed. So if I move you through the universe and you are a supervenient
pattern on the structure of the universe, imagine the universe is something like an ocean. And the
present is the crest of a traveling wave through that ocean. And there are waves maybe in front
and behind us, but they're not our future, they're past, they're different universes that just happen
to be a little more along or a bit less along. The future and past would require you to leave the
crest of the wave, and you can't because you're always traveling with the wave. So there is no
way to leave that present because only the present exists from the perspective of that crest.
And you and me, we are vortices inscribed on the crest of that traveling wave. And the rotation
that the vortex is doing when it updates itself to observe the universe, to form a memory, and so on,
and to register its perceptions, and so on, will depend on the speed in which this vortex rotates.
And so if the vortex is moving along with the wave, then the updates in the vortex are a
function of the movement in the wave itself, the basic parasitize on the movement of the main wave.
And you cannot, as this vortex traveling with the wave, ever leave the wave. You can move a little
bit in the wave to the left or to the right. That is, moving to the left or to the right would be
movement in space. You cannot move in time. You just move with the time. And the faster you move
to the left or to the right, the less there will be updates available for turning up internal state.
So the fluctuations of the vortex becomes slower and slower the more the vortex moves in space.
And this leads to relativistic time. It means that from the perspective of the vortex, when it looks
at its environment, the environment gets distorted in time and space. So in this notion, we realize
why something would look like to a vortex that moves like this, like relativistic time. And we
understand that the relativistic time, from the fundamental perspective, how to make all this
happening, how to build a system that functions like this, cannot be fundamental. It's a result
to the observer. It will be what the universe looks like to the observer of the observer's
screens, as we always do. But it is not fundamental. What's fundamental are the state transitions.
So what we need to do is basically replace the physicalist time that is relativistic for good
reason in the frame of certain models by something that is more fundamental and allows us to derive
the relativistic time. And this would be state transitions. Very interesting. There's some,
in that spirit, or at least in that kind of direction, there's work by Marcus Mueller and
Philip Hohn, and then also some more recent work by Favio Mercati and Giovanni Emiliano Camiglia,
where they're showing how relativistic space times can be constructed from exchange of
quantum information. So you don't assume it up front, but you try to get a dictionary
that allows different quantum agents to send information back and forth. And it turns out
if you send enough information back and forth and try to set up a dictionary to make everything
consistent, you will get Einstein's special relativistic space time coming out of it. So
that's an interesting direction to go. Another interesting direction to think about,
just a simple notion, time and entropy, or at least physical time and entropy are deeply connected.
And so we would like to have some way of getting entropic time coming out of a deeper system in
which there is no entropic time. And I'm not saying this is the deepest way of doing it,
but an interesting simple way, just in the case of Markovian dynamics. So if I have a Markovian
system, homogeneous, and it's in a stationary, then the entropy of that system doesn't change.
So if for state X sub N and X N minus one and so forth, the entropy H of X sub N equals H of X
sub N minus one for all N. So there is no entropic time, but it's trivial to prove
that if you just do a simple conditioning, if I look at X N given X one or X N given,
then it turns out that H of X N given X one is greater than or equal to H of X N given X N minus
one. In other words, the very fact of doing conditioning, which is projection. So you can
think about, I take this dynamical system, which has a notion of state transition, it's a Markov
chain, but it doesn't have any entropic time. But as soon as you start projecting that nonentropic
system onto different perspectives by conditioning H of X N given X one, all of a sudden, now you
have entropy. And so now you have that kind of notion of time. So is that a direction that we
could go where we could still have, in some sense, a dynamical system, but it's not an entropic time
system and show how we get space time arising from that in the way that some of these
physicists are trying to do. I think that will be interesting. I think that it's a separate
question whether the real numbers exist versus, that's, it's a pretty strong statement to say
that real numbers don't exist. That's really quite interesting to say that they don't exist,
but I guess that's where you want to go anyway. Yeah, well, I agree with Pythagoras that real
numbers don't exist. And the time was not right back then. So real numbers are actually functions.
And you can, I can give you this function instead of a real number and it can give you as many
digits as you want, or as you can afford to compute, but this is it. And it's fine. So basically,
real numbers can be derived in a deterministic fashion. They are determined once they are
predetermined in the sense, but you will not know the billionth digit of the square root of two,
unless you find a procedure to compute it and the energy or the neck entropy to actually get there.
And this derivation of a result via using apneic entropy, I think, relates to our perception of
time. This causal arrow of time, which is aligned with the entropic arrow. Eric Drescher finds a
very good metaphor in his book, Good and Real, I think, to give an intuition how a symmetric system,
where the transitions are symmetric in both directions, is still not going to be symmetric
at scale when you look at it. So he takes as an example, a world that is made of large and small
billiard balls. And you put one of these billiard balls in motion and the transaction between the
billiard balls are all symmetrical, which means if you take a movie and you play it forward and
backward, you will see for every interaction between two billiard balls that it's the same
if you go the movie backwards or forwards. It's a simplified model where you have no friction.
And so we have no thermodynamic stuff going on. We look at the universe at the level where
thermodynamics doesn't exist yet, because maybe the stuff is too small to have these losses.
So we just look at the billiard ball universe where everything is deterministic and without
noise. And in this model, what we see is that when we zoom out, there is something that is happening
at scale. And that is some balls move after they have been hit and keep hitting other balls.
And if you play the movie backwards, it looks as if some balls are anticipating that they are going
to be soon hit and start moving as a result, as if they would be hit. So there is this asymmetry
that your balls leave a wake behind them. And this wake is describing in some sense the entropy
that we are looking at in our universe. That's the direction in which you can, as an embedded
observer, form memories. Because in order to form memories, you rely on the dissipation of
information between locations. And so whenever there is a way to form memories, it means that
you are aligned with some kind of entropic arrow. If you zoom out, it means that you can now sort
the states of the universe in such a way that you discover the concentric wave that you are part of
in our ocean-like universe has a point of origin. And this point of origin is a construction that
you make. You discover this by the wave expanding. And you discover it by information moving,
diffusing across the locations in the wave. So there is a hypothetical point
in the middle where the information is not diffused yet.
And this hypothetical point is what we imagine to be the Big Bang.
And it's a mathematical singularity in a way, because if you are in the Big Bang,
you don't know which direction to go unless the Big Bang is not completely perfect and symmetrical.
And the interesting thing about this before the Big Bang means it's the wrong question to ask,
because before the Big Bang, if you looked at it, it's like a moire pattern. This would be the point
where the information goes out of distribution or gets distributed or diffuses between locations in
the other direction. Every point of every trajectory that goes away from the Big Bang
goes into a future. Sorry to interrupt. Is this related to the Janus point?
Have you heard of Julian Barber's theory of time?
No. No, but it's an artifact of a certain description. Basically, we create a certain
mental model in which we describe the entropic arrow of time as the diffusion of information
across locations in the universe. And then we imagine that there is a single point where this
ends up. And if you go through this point on the other side, you go back into another future.
So the further we go away from this point in any direction, the further we go into a future
in which systems could form memories of the past. And to form memories of the past,
you need to have some kind of reservoir of neck entropy that you can tap and some kind of
puddle of neck entropy. And then you can reason about the conditions, how such puddles of neck
entropy could form, under which conditions, and how long they might last. I would like to get to
the topic of free will as well, and then also some audience questions. So why don't you, Donald,
outline your views on free will? Okay. Yeah. If in a physicalist framework,
which... So now I'll just talk about what most of my cognitive neuroscience peers think. Most of
them assume that physical systems are fundamental. Neural activity causes all of our behavior.
And in that case, there can be a fiction of... A useful fiction of free will, but it's really
just going to be a useful fiction. If I do something, it's really my neurons with the
neural activity that did it. And there is a sense in which you can say, I chose to do it because
neurons are part of me. So I think that's the point of view that Dan Dennett takes, for example,
on this. And Sam Harris replies on that. He says, well, yeah, I also grow my fingernails. I'm not
sure that I'm doing that by free will. So it's not real clear that just because my neurons are
doing it, I have free will, just in the same sense that I'm not using free will to grow my fingernails.
So Sam would say there's no such thing as free will, if you're a physicalist. Dan Dennett would
say I'm a physicalist and there is this important notion of free will. I think that, of course,
space-time isn't fundamental. And so that we have to completely think outside of that box
altogether. And as scientists, we have to say up front what our hypotheses, what our axioms or
fundamental assumptions are and be very clear about them up front. These conscious agents
in the mathematics, they get certain inputs. We can call them experiences that they have.
And then there's something called the Markovian kernel that describes what actions they take.
And those actions affect the experiences of other conscious agents. So that's just the mathematics
that my team has written down. It's a very simple notion of a Markovian dynamics of conscious agents
interacting. And it's not in physicalist framework. We're assuming that this is in its own world.
These are conscious agents and that's the foundation. Space and time are not the
foundation, conscious agents. So conscious experiences and interactions of conscious
agents are the foundational notion. And so then the question is, how shall we understand
the probability? So if I get a particular experience that comes into a conscious agent
and it then probabilistically affects the experience of other agents, how shall I
understand that probability? Shall I understand it as a free will choice or what?
And I could say, I refuse to answer the question. There's a probability there and that's as far as
I go with the theory. There's this agent. So I leave that probability as just where my theory
stops. I say, in some sense, wherever we see a probability in a theory, that's where explanation
stops. That's basically saying, I don't know. So I would say this, whenever in a scientific theory,
you see probabilities coming up, you're seeing the theory say, this is where I halt.
This is where my explanation stops. And there are two major
approaches toward understanding those probabilities, the objectivist and subjectivist
to probabilities. So objectivists say that these probabilities are
pointing to some real thing in the world. There is some real random generator in the world.
And subjectivists say, no, these are just degrees of belief. Whenever you see probabilities,
you're only talking about degrees of belief. But in either case,
explanation stops. How do I come to that belief? Well, I can only tell you probabilities.
What is that random objective process? I don't know, but I can just tell you probabilities.
And so really, whenever you see probabilities in a scientific theory, and they're all over the place,
I read that as saying, here's where explanation stops and our theories halt. And if we want to
go further, we're going to have to unpack that probability into some deeper theory.
So if I say that it's free will in the case of the conscious agents,
then, I mean, in some sense, that's just words. What the theory has is the probabilities,
and it has no further explanation. So if I say, if I call that probability of free will,
then I can call it that, but I haven't really done much to give much insight into the notion
of free will. Free will then becomes a primitive, and maybe that's what I want to do. I want to say,
this is where explanation stops, and so free will is primitive. So these probabilities are free will,
and I agree that that's where my theory stops, that I can do no further.
Now, what's interesting in the conscious agent dynamics that we're working on is that
any group of conscious agents together also satisfy the definition of a conscious agent,
and so they are a conscious agent. So any conscious agents interacting are also conscious
agents. So in the theory, there's one conscious agent, because if you take all of them together,
they would form one conscious agent. But then there are as many, if you're computational,
there's only a countable number of them, or in my case, I don't know, it may be an uncountable
number of conscious agents. But what's interesting is that you unpack this probability
in the Markovian kernel, there could be one big probability for the one agent, but you can unpack
that into all these dynamical systems that are interacting conscious agents with their own
probabilities and their own kernels. And what's interesting is that you could then give,
in some sense, an unpacking of the notion of free will in that way. You could say, well, yeah,
the one agent has free will and this probability, but I can actually do some non-trivial unpacking
of that notion in this sort of recursive unwinding of those probabilities throughout
the network. So there is the possibility here of, I mean, ultimately, there will be a primitive
notion of free will that is just primitive and not explained. But given that one, I can explain
all these other free wills sort of interacting, arising from this most primitive notion of free
will in a non-trivial way. But once again, I would point out something that I see all the time in
scientific theories, no theory in science will ever explain everything. And I would love to see
if Josje agrees or disagrees. I will just state to make a strong claim,
there cannot be a theory of everything because every theory has to make assumptions and those
assumptions are not explained, they're assumed. It's just that simple.
Okay. Am I correct in my summary of your views on free will that if in a physical theory you
have probability, now some of that probability is just due to our ignorance, but if there's a
fundamental probability, you can get a lot of things done. And I think that's a really
fundamental probability. You can just say, well, that's indicating that the theories break down,
we just don't know. Or you can say that there's something underneath producing those and that,
which is underneath the probabilities, is what you're calling free will. Is that correct or is
that off? Right. So if I'm a physicalist, I'll say that that probability is due to some
process that I can say no more about, but there's some process that generates this stuff. It's not
free will, it's just a physical process that I don't know. But if I'm taking consciousness to be
fundamental, then it's an interesting move to say that that probability can be interpreted as
free will. Now, of course, I'm not explaining anything. I'm just putting the notion free will,
the word free will on it, right? I see. And free will becomes just a primitive notion as well.
So that's where my explanation stops. And the most unpacking I can do is that recursive
unpacking that I mentioned, which is an interesting unpacking. But ultimately,
there's this primitive notion of free will that I have nothing further to say about.
But I think that that's not a problem specific to this theory. The last thing I was saying was that
that's endemic to all scientific theories. Every scientific theory will have miracles
at its foundation. By miracles, I mean assumptions that are taken for granted
and not explained. If you explain them, then you'll have a deeper theory with new assumptions
that explain those assumptions, but the new assumptions aren't explained. And so in this sense,
science can never have a theory of everything because science theories always have assumptions,
and the assumptions are what you don't explain.
Yeah. Joscha, I know Donald said there are quite a few elements to pick from there.
So we are interlocking claims, but let's address them. First of all, I don't know whether there
can be one theory of everything because my reasoning is not tight enough to make that
proof one way or the other. So at this point, I have to remain agnostic because I think from
where I stand, it seems to be possible that there can be a theory of everything, and it seems to be
possible that there cannot. From a computationalist perspective, whenever you have a set of
observations that is finite, you will be able to construct a computational model that explains
how to make such patterns. So in principle, there can always be a theory of everything that you
observe. That's something that I don't see a way around this. So this seems to be sound to me,
and I think that can be formally proven, but it seems to be almost trivial that it's proven. So
it's more interesting. The question is, can you narrow this down to a single one, to one theory
of everything? You will be always stuck with infinitely many theories of everything, where
most of these theories will be super inelegant and redundant and basically recordings of your
observations. Or will there be one theory that is the most elegant and explains everything neatly
and wraps it up? And of course, if you think about the space of all theories and think of them as
things that you can do in a language in which you can define truth, and if you realize that the
languages in which you can define truth consistently are the computational languages, it turns out that
all your models are going to be automata, and that you can sort the space of automata by the length
of their definitions. So it also seems that in principle it should be possible to find the
shortest automaton between two every pair of automata that you can construct and can up this.
Now the question is, what's your search procedure for all the possible automata? Do you have a search
procedure that you can hope that terminates? And this is not a question of whether it's mathematically
possible, but whether it's efficient. So is there an efficient strategy to find a theory of
everything that is the shortest one? And so far we haven't found one. And it relates to what AI is
doing in machine learning when it tries to identify what's going on in the domain. So in principle,
we can always be sure that we could be a brain in a vat and everything is just a nefarious conspiracy
that is playing out. And because we cannot exclude this, we can never be sure that our
theory of everything is the best theory that could exist of things. So that's obviously the
case. But if we take out this single thing and make the assumption that reality is not a conspiracy,
I think then it starts to look a lot brighter. Let's get to the notion of free will.
I think that free will is tied into the notion of agency. And the best explanation of what an agent
is that I found so far is that an agent is a control system that is intrinsically combined
with its own set point generator. A control system is a notion from cybernetics. It means you have
some system like a thermostat that is making a measurement using sensors, for instance,
the temperature in the room, and that has effectors by which it can change the dynamics of the system.
So the effector would be a switch that turns the heating on and off. And the system that's being
regulated is the temperature in the room. And the temperature in the room is disturbed
by the environment. And a simple thermostat will only act on its present measurement and then
translate this present measurement using a single parameter into whether it should switch or not.
And depending on choosing that parameter well, you have a more efficient regulation or not.
But if you want to be more efficient, you need to model the environment and the dynamics of
the system and maybe the dynamics of the sensory system and the actuator itself.
And you can do this. It means that you model the future of the regulation based on past
observations. So if you endow the controller with the ability to make a model of the future
and use this control model to fine tune the actions of the controller, it means that a
controller now is more than a thermostat. It's not going to just optimize the temperature in the room
the next frame. But it's going to optimize the integral of the temperature over a long time
span. So it basically takes a long expectation horizon. The further it goes, the better probably.
And then it tries to minimize all the temperature deviations from the ideal temperature from the
set point over that time span. This means that depending on the fidelity and detail of the model
of its environment and its interaction with the environment and itself, it's going to be better
and better if it assumes that there are trajectories in the world that are the result of
its own decisions. By turning the temperature on and off at this particular point in time,
I'm going to get this and this result, depending on the weather outside, depending on how often
people open and close the door to the room at different times of the day, depending on the
aging of my sensor or the distance of my sensor to the heating, and depending on whether the
window on top of the sensor is currently open or closed and so on. I get lots and lots more ways to
differentiate the event flow in the universe and the path that the universe can take and the
interactions that I can have with the universe that determine whether somebody will open the
window and so on and so on. So you have all these points where the controller is a very differentiated
model of reality, where it's going to prefer some events of others and is going to assign
its own decisions to these trajectories. And this decision making necessarily happens under
conditions of uncertainty, which means the controller will never be completely sure which
one is going to the right decision. The controller will have to make educated guesses, bets on the
future. And this even includes the models of itself, right? The better the control system
understands itself and the limitations of its modeling ability, the better its models are going
to be. So at some point of complexity, this thing is going to understand its own modeling procedure
to improve it and to find gaps in it and so on. And this also means that when it starts to do this,
it is going to discover that there are agents in the world, other controllers that have set
points, generators and model the future and make decisions. For instance, people that might open
the window when you make the room too hot and you lose energy because of that. So maybe not
overheat the room and people are in the room. This means you have to model agency at some point.
And you will also discover yourself as an agent in the world, as a controller, as a set point generator
and the ability to model the future. And you will discover this before you understand how your own
modeling of the future works. So you also have to make bets on how you work before you understand
yourself. So you will discover a self-model. The self-model is the agent where the contents of
your own model are driving the behavior of that agent. It's a very particular agent. It's one
where your reasoning and your modeling has an influence on what this agent is going to do,
a direct coupling. It's a very specific model, a very specific agent that you discover there.
And so in some sense, free will, I think, is a perspective on decision making under uncertainty
starting from the point where you discover your own self-model up to the point where you
deconstruct it again. And of course you will deconstruct it again at some point. You will be
able to fully understand how you're operating. And once you do this, making your decision becomes
indistinguishable from predicting your decision. Because of computational irreducibility, often you
will not be able to predict the position before you make it, right? But as soon as you understand
that there is just a computational process going on, and you understand the properties of that
process, you will no longer experience yourself as having free will. Free will is a particular
kind of model that happens as a result of your own self-model being a simulacrum, instead of being a
high-fidelity simulation of how you actually work. And we are young beings. We don't get very old.
It's very difficult for us to get to the point where we fully understand how we work,
except in certain circumstances, right? When we observe our children, very often we get to the
point as parents that we fully understand what they will be doing in a given situation.
And we can fully understand their own actions and anticipate their decisions. And the child
might experience that it has free will. And we experience that the child has free will up to the
point where we suddenly understand, oh, this is what's going on. And at this point, I can completely
control the child because I can out-model it, right? And it's only to the point where this
system is going to introduce levels that are, again, reaching my own level, that decisions
become unpredictable. But if I am a few levels of modeling depth above the other agent that might
think that it's free will, the free will starts to disappear from my own perspective. And also
happens in my own mind. There's many things that I do, but I thought as a child, I'm acting out of
my own free will. And now I understand how mechanical it is. And I can deal with myself
by controlling myself, by out-modeling myself successively, and becoming one more complex in
this way. And in all that, Josje, the computational process, the probabilities
in the transition rules, you would view those as objective probabilities then?
Yes. So there is also this issue that I don't actually exist in the way in which I model
myself. I only exist to some degree of approximation. I'm not this big tree that
is strictly implemented in physical reality. I'm more like a bunch of shrubbery. And some of the
shrubbery is tasked with making a model of myself as a tree. And that model is going to be coarse
approximation. So the fact that I am unable to follow up on my plans means that I'm only
approximately implemented. The rubber hand illusion is a good example of how we're continually
redefining who we are, right? Where you tap and drag on a hand at the same time you're
tapping and dragging on a rubber hand. And if you do it just right with a person,
they'll take this rubber hand and incorporate it into their body image. So we're always learning
who we are. But those probabilities in that learning process, you would take as objective
probabilities and not free will kinds of probabilities. What does it mean that a
probability is objective? It only means based on the models in which I have currently made.
And if I go far beyond back, I cannot assign an objective probability to the probabilities that I
am observing because they are contingent on the assumption, for instance, I'm currently not in a
dream. Or that my memories are correct or that my data are correct or that the theories that
event into establishing the relationships between my measurements and my data and so on are correct.
So I do agree that at some point there are a lot of assumptions that go into this. And these
assumptions differ with you are usually mild because I make so many observations that at some
point I can, the arrows cancel each other out. Or there's so many people that can verify my ideas
and shut them down. And so my ideas don't exist in isolation. They are being shot against every
philosophy and physics book that I can get my hands on and that I understand, right? And every
conversation that I have. So that doesn't mean that I will discover the truth in this way, but
it means that I discover many, many of the possible errors that I can make. And at some point I realized
that there is a finite space of theories that exists and that we are discovering the same things
again and again. So when we ask ourselves, what are integers, for instance, or what are rational
numbers, there are many ways of making theories about what integers are. For instance, we can say
that there are the cardinalities of sets. So basically you count members of a set, and this
is an integer, and all the numbers of members of sets that you can have are integers. Or you can say
that there are a subsequent Liebling scheme. That's the definition that I currently prefer.
Or you can use Peano's axioms to formalize them. And it turns out that they all describe exactly
the same thing. They are all different perspectives on the same thing. And once you understand the
larger space that runs the integers, you also understand why they are different perspectives,
because you understand how these perspectives are being constructed, and you can show that it's all
the same thing. So in some sense, the integers are a fractal. And you can describe this fractal
using a generator function, and you can also describe it in many other ways. And it seems that
mathematics, or all the languages that we can use that work, are usually a small, relatively
intelligible set of fractals. And they are the boundary of what is intelligible to the human
mind, but not that far above it, and probably still inside of it. So I'm more optimistic than you are.
I have a question for the both of you. It's about your models. How much of it would have to change,
let's say, Joscha, in your case, if classical logic was indeed correct, if continuities exist?
And for Donald, if the opposite was true, so continuity doesn't exist, intuitionist logic is
primary. So at some point in my life, I thought that continuity must exist, because everybody was
assuming that it did. Like, most of the eminent physicists thought that the universe must be
fundamentally continuous. Many of the foundational theories that we have in physics
assume that there is continuity. And I thought that my inability to derive continuity, to construct
a continuous system, is the result of my lack of understanding. And it took me quite some time to
realize that what Gödel has stumbled upon was actually the insight that continuity cannot exist,
because it's not constructive, cannot be implemented. So once you have the infinities,
once you presuppose them, there are an amazing cornucopia, all sorts of stuff falls out.
Like, you have Hilbert's Hotel that is completely booked out, but has infinitely many rooms, and then
there are infinitely many buses coming on, and you just ask everybody to move in the room with
twice their number, and then you fit in the infinitely many new people, right? This is not a feature.
This is a bug. This shouldn't happen. And no hotels work. No hotels work like this.
This is not good if something like this happens. And it's not surprising that this blows up when
you try to make proofs. And so I think that Hilbert's Hotel points not to a miracle in the
universe that under certain circumstances you get something for nothing, which is very nice if you
want to derive a universe from nothing. But it shows that your language can break. And so I don't
see a way to get the languages in which continuity exists to work. And I cannot exclude that I'm wrong,
and I might see a way in the future, or somebody else does, in a way that I don't. I just don't see
a way how to make continuity work. But I get all the benefits from continuity for the description
of practical systems using discrete logic. So in this sense, I would say that dynamical systems
that are truly continuous don't exist. They're not causally existing. They cannot be causal.
They are a layer of description that I use to deal with too many parts to count, and they are
sometimes a very useful abstraction. But they cannot be used for a foundational theory.
Because the foundational stuff has to work. It has to be described in a language where all the
parts have to interface in such a way that your language doesn't blow up, because otherwise
the terms in your language don't mean anything. So what this means is that the word
continuity does not actually mean anything in my world. It does not have a useful reference.
I cannot point at anything that is truly continuous without my language breaking.
So it doesn't exist. It's a word that only exists as a confusion. But it exists approximately.
It exists as the dynamics of too many parts to count, which is fine.
So I'm a confused man. And when you say that the language is breaking, I just see it as
you saying that there are extremely unintuitive results that, well, they don't seem to make sense,
but it doesn't mean that they don't make sense, because you defined work as what's implementable.
Now, what it doesn't work means that you can no longer derive truth. It means, for instance,
in an axiomatic system, if you have a contradiction in your axioms, it means that you can suddenly
derive everything and nothing. It just means that your fractal is no longer having a discernible
structure. This is what it means that it's breaking. What is the exact contradiction
in classical logic? Because it seems as though mathematicians are getting along fine,
and it's difficult, extremely difficult, to prove certain theorems. And it wouldn't be if there was
a contradiction. Well, not necessarily, but you understand what I mean. Yes. So the issue is that
the assumption of a stateless platonic notion of truth that holds independent of the process
by which you discover the truth leads into contradictions. And this was what Gödel had
proven. It basically means that a sentence that is true under these assumptions is also false under
these assumptions. So it cannot be true. And this is where undecidability comes in. It's not just
about that some sentences are not reachable, because you don't know whether they're true or
false. It also means that there are some sentences that are true and false at the same time. But if
you have to find truth in such a way that it can, that it includes falsity, something is either true
or false. If you have an excluded middle, then this cannot be the case. So this is a very bad
result. It just means that your language is not working. It gets to illegal states. It just means
that the application of steps that you have prescribed in your logic, if you apply them
properly, leads to an undefined result. It means that your language is segfaulting. It means your
mind is breaking apart. It means that the thoughts that you are thinking no longer have meaning,
because they can no longer point to anything that could be implemented.
Okay, so Don, the question that I asked before was, let's imagine the intuitionist logic is
correct. How does your theory change? Well, yeah, so I mean, I could easily
implement the theory of conscious agents, you know, in an intuitionist logic kind of approach
and run it that way. So that wouldn't really change my theory of conscious agents fundamentally. But
my own thinking on this, I guess, does differ from Joscha's in an interesting way here. And that is,
I do take Gödel's result, not necessarily to show that the notion of continuity is nonsense or
contradictory, but rather that if I have a finite system of axioms and derivation rules,
then you can look at the set of statements that can be proven by that system, then you can find
statements that are not provable within that system, so they're undecidable from within that
system. But what Gödel did was to put a mapping onto the language of that system, so he could
write down an analogy, as Douglas Hofstadter likes to talk about it. He found an analogy that he
could write down, where there is this sentence I could write down that says, I am true,
but not provable within this system. And that doesn't seem to me to require me going all the
way off to uncountable infinities and continuity and so forth. It's just saying, I mean,
here's the deflationary reading of Gödel. It's just saying, you give me any computational system,
I'll find a statement that's true, but can't be derived from within that system. Therefore,
any computation that you pick isn't the final word. I don't have to go all the way to
you know, uncountable sets and so forth. I can just use that to say that the computation can't
be the final truth. And so that would be sort of the minimal way. And that's why I think a lot of
researchers have interpreted Gödel, but I guess you all should disagree on that.
Okay, what would be the thing that goes beyond that? So what is the other language that you can
use after Gödel's language broke? Well, what you do is you take the new statement
that you showed was undecidable within that computation system, and you add it to your
computational system, right? Every computational system has axioms. You don't compute without
some assumptions. So your computation has to have certain axioms to begin with. So you add it to
your axiom. It's now still a finite set of axioms. And now you say, okay, now I'm good. I took that
undecidable sentence and I put it into my set of axioms. I'm good. Now I'm done. Well, no, you're
not. Now, because Gödel comes back and says, you know what, I just found another statement within
your new system, and that's not computable. So I'm not getting anywhere near to these uncountable
infinities. No, wait, wait, wait. You're making a step too far here, I think. You have just found
this procedure that discovers that something is true that is not true according to mathematics.
So Gödel is trying to find a foundation for all of mathematics. And he does this by reducing the
mathematics that he's interested in to Peano arithmetic, and then computes all of mathematics
in Peano arithmetic and discovers that he cannot recover the semantics that he wanted to discover,
which was a platonic notion of truth, one that is independent of the state sequence that he
runs it through. This is the thing that he cannot recover. And you try to recover the original
mathematics by extending the axiomatic system, Peano's axioms, with an infinite set of arbitrary
statements. This doesn't seem to be very elegant. Also, of course, Gödel shows that it doesn't
terminate. It doesn't work. It's not fixing mathematics in any way. So you still have
the intuition here that you have a procedure that allows you to discover truth in ways that
Gödel's procedure could not. And if you have that procedure, you should be able to prove that it's
true. If you cannot prove that it's true, I'm not going to believe you. I don't think that the
statements that you think are true but my system cannot prove are true. Unless you can compute them.
So you have to show a way that would force me as a rational observer and colleague of yours
that is completely charitable and so on and reasonable and rational to follow you there.
So if you can give me a rational procedure, then I expect that this procedure will be
computational. That there will be a sequence of steps that I can follow to see why your claim
that the sentence is true is actually valid. If you cannot make such a claim, I don't see how I can
believe you. Well, so the way I understand Gödel doing it is that he comes up with this whole
Gödel numbering approach. And he takes you through and shows you this mapping from the numbers into
these Gödel numbers that are making statements about the numbers themselves. And you look at
that and you go, yeah, okay. I understand that mapping. That's perfectly fine. And now I can
write down within that mapping, I can write down this number. And when I look at the interpretation
of that number under this mapping, the number says I am true but not provable within Keanu.
And so now, at this point, I sort of agree with Roger Penrose. Penrose looks at that and says,
okay, that means that there is something true here. I can see that it's true. I don't disbelieve
I saw the whole Gödel numbering construction. I saw how the sentence came to say what it says.
And I agree that it's all consistent. And what it's saying, it's saying that it's true and not
provable. So at this point, I guess I sort of agree with Penrose at that point. I go, okay,
there's something beyond the notion of proof, beyond the notion of derivation that's going on
here. There's the looking at analogies and understanding analogies that where we go,
this sentence is clearly true. And it's also by its own statement, its own declaration,
that it's not provable within this finite computational system.
Penrose is fascinating. He thinks that our brains are physical systems. And he also thinks that our
mental processes are generated by the brain, probably, but that our brains can do mathematics
that go beyond the mathematics that computers can do. That is a very specific statement that
is more concrete, I think, and specific than what you've said so far. And it leads him to
a weird spot, which is quite lonely at the moment. But I find this nevertheless a very
interesting argument to make. I'm afraid we will not be able to resolve it today because I have to
drop now. But I found it very interesting to see that you are a Penroseist at the end of the day.
Well, I don't like the microtubules theory, and I don't like the non-computational collapse of
microtubules theory.
He's not really to be blamed for this. I suspect that his reasoning is that since all known physics
is computational, basically, it takes a state, and then there is a transition between the states.
The resolution for what consciousness, where it comes from, if consciousness is enabling us to do
things that computers cannot, needs to be in an unknown area of physics. And the unknown area of
physics that's left, reasoning in the same way as Sherlock Holmes, if you actually exclude all the
possibilities, the only remaining thing must be the truth, right? That's quantum gravity,
because there is no generally accepted theory of quantum gravity. And then it just so happens that
Hameroff has this beautiful psychedelic theory of how to get the microtubules to have non-local
interactions that employ quantum gravities in a way that nobody really understands.
And this might be in this corner. And so they became friends. But I don't think that Penrose
theory is exactly the same thing as Hameroff theory.
Right, right. And I'm not talking about that more general theory of consciousness. I'm just
talking about his specific analysis of Gödel's incompleteness theorem and what it means for
mathematics. Yes. And it's basically also something that Chomsky is a few into,
in which leads Chomsky to mysterionism. So basically, they were confronted with the same
insight or the same idea that they think that the human brains can do things that mathematics cannot,
that mathematicians can make proofs that computers in principle cannot make, that they discover that
certain statements are true that in a computable axiomatic system cannot be derived. And this was
also what my question was pointing out, at how do you know that something is true there if you
cannot go show me a sequence of steps that does it, right? And so Penrose thinks that
there must be unknown physics. And Chomsky thinks it cannot be understood in principle,
which might be the same thing at the end of the day. Right. I guess we will have to go. I'll just
say our basic understanding of the axioms itself, then maybe one thing to, how do I understand the
basic axioms that are the foundation of the computational system? Where does that understanding
come from? Is that from within the computational system or does that escape the computational
system? From my own perspective, it's the case that my mind is constructing a model of reality,
the reality that I found myself to be in is something like a physics engine in which my
own conscious self acts as a puppet, as a simulacrum that is being used to tell the story about
an intelligent agent. And I don't see any limitations in my ability to make models that
could produce such an agent that would find itself in this world and associate a set of
valence precepts with a garlic and another one with sunlight. And that happens entirely through
the relational nature of my unified model of the universe that is being derived by completely
non-nefarious computation that are approximated in nervous systems. So I don't see where I currently
stand that this doesn't work out. And I'm very sympathetic to when you don't see this,
that it doesn't work out and that you have to think that you have to find the truth elsewhere.
And it could be that I am going to change my mind in the future when I stumble on something that
basically shows to me that what I'm intellectually trying doesn't work. So as far as it seems to work,
and I appreciate that we have this difference in our perspectives because it's a very productive
useful one to have. Absolutely. I've really appreciated the tenor of the conversation too,
very much so. I would just say my last thought on this would be that what I would love to see
from a computational system on consciousness is the association you just talked about between
the computation and say the taste of garlic. Is it principled or is it arbitrary, that association?
If it's arbitrary, then I'm not... Yes, it's not arbitrary.
It's arbitrary? Because it is related to the valence of the taste receptors that you have.
So it might be arbitrary in the sense that some people hate garlic and other people love garlic.
So the garlic will taste different to them. This means they will have a different experience when
they taste garlic because the relations of the taste of garlic will be different to the
entire world model that they have than they are to other people. So basically the types of
receptors that we have and the valence that they imply and the type of self-model that we have. So
in which way has the mind constructed itself that is entangled with its universe around it? What is
that boundary? What is the set points that are marking this boundary that keeps the self stable?
This is going to shape and alter the perception. But I don't think that there is an intrinsic
essence of perception beyond the relations that we establish between perceptual patterns
and our models of reality. So there'll always be the question why should this computational
process, independent of valence, be the taste of garlic? Why couldn't it have been the taste
of chocolate? I would want a principled answer to why is this computational process necessarily
the taste of garlic? Why isn't it the taste of chocolate? Because one is affiliated to garlic
and the other one is associated to chocolate. But I'm talking about the conscious experience
of the taste of... Oh well, chocolate is sweet for the most part and garlic is not. So this is one of
the dimensions in which the features vary and sweetness is perceived as pleasant under some
circumstances when you need certain types of nutrients and the soreness and bitterness and
sharpness of garlic is associated with other things that you might need or dislike at certain moments.
So the valence is crucial that you get and there are basically hundreds or thousands or
tens of thousands of valence dimensions that specify how we perceive this texture of the
pattern. But the resolution, the structure of the pattern and so on is entirely given by
its relational nature. I don't think that there's an essence beyond the relations.
It's like well this is the start of a whole other conversation.
This is round one. Take care everyone. Thank you so much.
Thank you too.
Good to talk.
I enjoyed this.
Thank you very much.
It was plenty of fun and the audience is all saying thank you as well. I think there were
about a thousand people.
Well thank you very much.
Thank you, Joscha. Please send me the mp3 if you don't mind.
And Don, I don't know if you still are recording yours.
Bye bye.
Okay.
Bye bye.
Take care.
Thank you all. Thank you all. Thank you all so much for being here. It was plenty of fun.
There's plenty to talk about for a round two whenever that occurs. Maybe toward the end of
the summer or the middle of summer. We'll see people's willingness and ability.
The podcast is now finished. If you'd like to support conversations like this, then do
consider going to patreon.com slash c u r t j a i m u n g a l. That is Curt Jaimungal. It's
support from the patrons and from the sponsors that allow me to do this full time. Every dollar
helps tremendously. Thank you.